Draft: Secondary index specification (#16961)
apache/iceberg: format/index.md

 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Iceberg Index Specification

## Background and Motivation

Indexes enable query engines to locate relevant rows without scanning entire datasets.
They can accelerate point lookups, range predicates, and other retrieval patterns
while preserving Iceberg's table format, snapshot isolation, and interoperability.

Indexes are optional. Engines may choose to create, maintain, consume, or ignore them.

## Goals

- Define a portable metadata format for indexes
- Provide a common storage architecture for index data

> - Expose indexes as catalog-managed objects

Author: I think we might want to remove this line.
This will be described in the IRC spec.

Reviewer: Agree. Let's remove.

Reviewer 2: I think this is an important point, I have been confused about the coupling between the table data and the index changes, which I expressed in other threads. It is fine to express it differently and even elsewhere, but I'm not sure what the IRC spec is.

Author: IRC spec is a shorthand for Iceberg REST Catalog specification. This is where we define the requirements for the Catalogs.

- Allow indexes to be operated independently from source table metadata
- Enable index sharing across engines
- Provide a framework for defining new index types and transform functions

## Overview

> Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files.) Leaf files store an ordered set of rows, each containing at least a key, the path of the Iceberg table data file, and the position within that file where the row for that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Index Transform Function which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.

Author: ```suggestion
Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files). Leaf files store an ordered set of rows, each containing at least a key, the path of the Iceberg table data file, and the position within that file where the row for that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Index Transform Function which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.
```

## Index Metadata

The index metadata file stores the index definition and snapshot history.

### Index Metadata File

| Requirement | Field               | Type                     | Description                                     |
|-------------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| required    | format-version      | int                      | Index specification version                     |
| required    | uuid                | string                   | Stable UUID assigned at creation                |
| required    | table-uuid          | string                   | UUID of the indexed table                       |
| required    | location            | string                   | Index root location                             |
| required    | type                | string                   | Logical index type                              |
| required    | transform-function  | string                   | Physical organization transform                 |
| required    | key-column-ids      | list<int>                | Source-table column IDs the transform is applied to (key columns) |

> | optional    | included-column-ids | list<int>                | Source-table column IDs copied into the index for read convenience (included columns) |

Reviewer 3: It would good to add in the case - what happens when the source table's schema evolves after the index is created — specifically if a column referenced in 'key-column-ids' or
  'included-column-ids' gets dropped or renamed.

Since these are field IDs, a rename should be fine (IDs are stable), but a drop seems like it would break the index — does the index instance become invalid at that point, or do we just
  stop being able to produce new snapshots for it? I think this is worth a sentence or two, maybe near the Index Instance section where key/included columns are defined

Author: The queries running against an older table snapshot that still uses the original schema would continue to be able to use the corresponding index snapshot. However, once the indexed columns are removed from the table schema, the index maintenance process can no longer produce new index snapshots because the required source columns no longer exist. As a result, queries against newer table snapshots would be unable to use that index.

How an engine handles this situation is an implementation detail. For example, it could:
- Stop using the index for queries against newer table snapshots.
- Mark the index as invalid when presenting index metadata to users.
- Reject the column drop operation if an index still depends on the column.

I don't think this behavior should be prescribed by the specification. The spec should focus on the storage and metadata model for indexes, while engine-specific behavior in these scenarios can be left to implementations.

Reviewer 3: also, what about type promotion — e.g. int → long on a key column? the field ID stays the same so nothing in the current spec would catch it, but the physical encoding of indexed values changes. should that also invalidate the index?

It contains summary metadata about all leaf files belonging to the index snapshot and enables efficient planning
without scanning every leaf file.

The tracking file may be stored using any supported metadata file format.

### Leaf File Entry

Each tracking file contains a collection of leaf file entries. A leaf file entry describes a single leaf file
tracked by an index snapshot. The fields are the subset of the V4 manifest entry fields that are relevant to planning
queries against the index.
Entries contain aggregated statistics for all referenced leaf files, enabling engines to perform pruning and planning
without opening every leaf file.

| Field ID | Name               | Type    | Requirement  | Description                                                                                                  |
|----------|--------------------|---------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 100      | location           | string  | required     | Location of the referenced file.                                                                             |

> | 101      | file_format        | string  | required     | File format name, such as parquet, avro, or orc.                                                             |

Reviewer 2: Given that the Puffin spec refers to indexes explicitly, I'm wondering why Puffin is not listed as an accepted format. Would you mind clarifying?

Reviewer: The `file_format` here is for the leaf files, which are tabular sorted-row collections (transform_value, key columns, optional included columns, file_path, position), so they use columnar/row formats (Parquet/Avro/ORC) that give a typed schema, sorted layout, and per-column stats. Puffin is a blob container for whole-read artifacts like sketches and deletion vectors; it has no columnar schema or sorted-row layout, so it isn't a fit for leaf data. The "index" Puffin refers to is that blob/sketch style, not this leaf layout.

Reviewer 2: @huaxingao Sounds good, but help me understand the situation of Puffin in this context, please. The format explicitly refers to indexes right in the motivation:

> This is a specification for Puffin, a file format designed to store information such as **indexes** and statistics about data managed in an Iceberg table that cannot be stored directly within the Iceberg manifest.

Is the plan to not promote Puffin for indexes any longer or what are the situations in which one would use it for indexes? I'd appreciate if you could clarify.

Author: We do not expect to use Puffin for SCALAR indexes, as existing columnar file formats already provide efficient mechanisms for targeted reads which are not available for Puffin files, such as row group pruning and, potentially, page indexes in the future.

For VECTOR indexes, however, Puffin may be a better fit for storing auxiliary structures that do not naturally map to a columnar representation. Examples include IVF centroid lists, quantization parameters, and DiskANN graph structures.

Reviewer 2: Got it, thank you.

The schema of a leaf file is determined by the index definition and contains:
- All key columns defined by the index
- Any included columns defined by the index
- The transform value produced by the transform function
- The source file path
- The source row position

Entries within a leaf file are sorted by transform value, then by the key columns. This lets a reader binary-search for a
key within the leaf after selecting it from the tracking file, and groups all entries that share a key.

### Transform value ranges

This section describes how transform values organize leaf files. For the list of transform functions and their bound
interpretations, see [Index Transform Function](#index-transform-function).

The transform function produces a transform value for each indexed row. To enable efficient planning, the transform
value space is divided into non-overlapping ranges. Each leaf file contains entries for a single range, while the
tracking file stores the corresponding bounds for every leaf file. If, and only if, a single transform value produces
more rows than fit in one leaf file, multiple leaf files may be created for that value, and engines must read all of

> them.

Author: ```suggestion
more rows than fit in one leaf file, multiple leaf files may be created for that value.
```

Author: Removed the `must`, since this is a specification, and the engine might decide to skip a file based on column stats, or other reasons

Reviewer: Sounds good.

### Leaf Schema

Columns originating from the source table must preserve their original Iceberg field identifiers.
Reusing the original field IDs ensures that schema evolution, column renames, and type compatibility semantics remain
consistent between the table and the index.

The index-specific columns are:

| Field Id  | Column          | Type   | Description                                                            |
|-----------|-----------------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TBD       | transform_value | long   | The result of applying the index transform function to the key columns |
| TBD       | file_path       | string | The path of the source data file the entry references                  |
| TBD       | position        | long   | The row position of the entry within the source data file              |

## Example: Key Lookup Index

Index Type:

```text
SCALAR
```

Transform Function:

```text
HASH(primary_key)
```

Leaf Schema:

| Column           |
|------------------|
| primary_key      |
| transform_value  |
| file_path        |
| position         |

> The leaf files are organized by hash key, while the tracking file stores summary information and pruning statistics.

Author: ```suggestion
The leaf files are organized by transform value, while the tracking file stores summary information and pruning statistics.
```

> ## Snapshot Evolution

Reviewer 3: does index snapshot commits are assumed single-writer (no conflict possible) or need the same base-read validate-on-CAS-failure pattern tables use?

Author: We typically expect a single writer for the indexes (index maintenance process), but we need to build simple blocks and atomic commits to prevent accidental corruption of the index history.

Author: added a paragraph about commit/conflict handling

Index snapshots are immutable.

Updating an index creates:

1. New leaf files
2. A new tracking file pointing to new leaf files, and potentially some old leaf files that are still valid for the new snapshot.
3. A new index metadata file

> The catalog commits the update by atomically replacing the metadata location.

Reviewer 3: I think adding some detail about the conflict case, and how it's handled, would help here.
  
  E.g. if the index's base snapshot (the one the writer read as truth) has changed by the time we go to commit, we can't just commit — we'd need to retry against the updated base if there's
  no actual conflict, otherwise fail.

  To make that clear, it'd help to explicitly define 'base of index' in this spec too, rather than leaving it implicit or assuming readers will infer it from the table commit flow. The
  definition may end up being the same, but I think it's worth spelling out here for clarity.

Author: Added a paragraph about commit/conflict handling

## Maintenance

An index maintains a mapping between source table snapshots and index snapshots.

> Engines may use this mapping to determine whether a compatible index snapshot exists for a given table snapshot.

Reviewer 3: This section says engines can check if a 'compatible' index snapshot exists for a table snapshot, but doesn't say what makes two snapshots compatible/incompatible.
  
  Since an index snapshot is pinned to an exact 'source-table-snapshot-id', wouldn't a pure compaction of the source table (no logical row change, just file rewrite) still invalidate every
  existing index snapshot and force a full rebuild? If so, that seems like a significant cost for maintenance to be aware of — might be worth mentioning here, or at least flagging as a known
  tradeoff of the snapshot-pinning approach

Author: If the compaction rebuilds the whole source table, then the index has to be rebuilt as well. Otherwise the index maintenance could be limited, but the scope is greatly dependent on the transform function.

 - this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
 - The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
 - (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
 - the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
 -
 -   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
 -
 - Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
 - distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
 - WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Iceberg Index Specification

## Background and Motivation

Indexes enable query engines to locate relevant rows without scanning entire datasets.
They can accelerate point lookups, range predicates, and other retrieval patterns
while preserving Iceberg's table format, snapshot isolation, and interoperability.

Indexes are optional. Engines may choose to create, maintain, consume, or ignore them.

## Goals

- Define a portable metadata format for indexes
- Provide a common storage architecture for index data

> - Allow indexes to evolve independently from table metadata as catalog-managed objects

Reviewer 4: I feel that we are trying to convey 2 things from this point: 1/ index shouldn't be defined or associated to table metadata, and 2/ index is a catalog object. I wonder if we want to mention these more explicitly, with something like 
```
- Expose indexes as catalog-managed objects
- Allow index to be operated independently from source table metadata
```

Reviewer: Spitted to two points

- Enable index sharing across engines
- Provide a framework for defining new index types and transform functions

## Overview

> Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files.) Leaf files store an ordered set of rows containing at least a key and the path of a Iceberg Table data file and the position within that file where the row where that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Indexing Transform which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files.) Leaf files store an ordered set of rows containing at least a key and the path of a Iceberg Table data file and the position within that file where the row where that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Index Transform Function which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.
```

Reviewer: Fixed

Like Iceberg tables, views, and functions:

- Metadata files (index metadata and tracking files) and data files (leaf files) are immutable
- Updates create new metadata files
- Catalogs perform atomic metadata swaps

Each index snapshot references a tracking file which describes the leaf files belonging to the snapshot.

```text
Index Metadata
    |
    +-- Index Snapshot
            |

>             +-- Tracking File

Reviewer 5: Why not using two level tracking files as table?

Reviewer 3: I believe both has pros/con.....
2 level can be a problem while analyzing the metadata, and need to list the files.

Reviewer: The single tracking file is intentional: tables need manifest-list → manifest → data because they span millions of files and long history across many manifests, but an index state for a given snapshot is a single complete unit, so one tracking file is enough.

Reviewer 5: Sounds reasonable to me. Index update is not as complicated as tables.

                    |
                    +-- Leaf Data Files
```

Transform functions derive a transform value from the key columns and determine how index entries are organized within
the leaf files.
- The transform value space is divided into non-overlapping ranges.
- Each leaf file stores entries for a single range.
- The tracking file stores range bounds for each leaf file.

This structure enables efficient planning while keeping the data layout flexible for different index implementations.

## Definitions

### Index Type

The index type defines the logical category of an index and the class of queries it is designed to accelerate.

> The following index type is defined in this specification:

Reviewer 4: I'm a little confused on what the "defined in this specification" and "reserved for future specifications" mean; is the rest of this spec only defining what's needed for `SCALAR`, and we have no assumption to what is required for `VECTOR` and `TERM` at all (while we recognize that those are popular types as well and serve as a "promise" that they will be handled later)? Some later sections, such as the leaf schema and transform/range model feels generic, so I think it would be helpful to clarify the scope.

Reviewer: Good question. The important thing to clarify: this spec is meant to be generic and work for all index types. The framework isn't specific to any one type.

It's really doing two jobs, and I've now made that clear in the text:

- A shared, generic framework: the metadata, snapshot, tracking file, and leaf file structure, plus the transform/range model. This part is the same for every index type (key-lookup, vector, term, ...), which is why those sections look generic. That's intentional.
- The SCALAR (key-lookup) type: the one type we're fully defining for now, built on top of that framework.

VECTOR and TERM are just reserved names for now. We're claiming them so that engines and catalog implementations recognize them as valid type names and handle them gracefully, but this spec doesn't define how they work yet: no leaf schema, no transforms, no query rules. We'll define the vector index and term index in a future spec, on top of this same generic framework.

The group only scoped the key-lookup index so far and hasn't formally agreed on the SCALAR/VECTOR/TERM taxonomy. So this defined-vs-reserved split is the intended model, but the specific type names may still change once we align on that.

Reviewer 5: As I commented earlier, I don't think we should include the index type section. I think some part of this spec, like metadata, snapshot are general enough for different index types. But the design of tracking file and leaf file are not, they are mostly for traditional secondary index, not for vector index or term index.

| Type   |
|--------|
| SCALAR |

The following index types are reserved for future specifications:

| Type   |
|--------|
| VECTOR |
| TERM   |

The index type communicates the capabilities of an index to query engines and helps determine whether an index is
applicable to a particular query.

### Index Transform Function

> The index transform function defines how the index organization key is derived from source table columns when rows are

Reviewer 4: I think the term `index organization key` is only used once throughout this spec and might worth defined more explicitly; I think the latter spec refer to the same as `transform value` (would "transformed value" be more clear?) and since that's the key for the index instance, do we also want to give it a more explicit name for reference, like `index key` or something? I think in general, it might be nice to differentiate 1/ this "transform value", 2/ the source columns used to generate the transform value column, 3/ any additional optional columns from the source data that are covered in the index but has no impact to the construction of the index (covering index)

Reviewer: Dropped "index organization key" and standardized on "transform value" (kept over "transformed value" to match the transform_value field). Added up-front definitions for transform value, key columns, and included columns.

stored in the index.

The transform function determines the physical organization of the indexed data and therefore influences which query
patterns can efficiently leverage the index.

The following transform functions are defined in this specification:

| Transform |
|-----------|
| IDENTITY  |
| HASH      |
| HILBERT   |

The following transform function is reserved for future specifications:

| Transform |
|-----------|

> | IVF       |

Reviewer 3: what is IVF? shall we add details here?

Reviewer: IVF (Inverted File index) is a clustering scheme for approximate nearest-neighbor search in vector indexes. It only applies to the VECTOR type, which this spec doesn't define yet, so that's why it's listed under future specifications.

> | IVF       |

Reviewer 4: From my understanding IVF is vector related, which was considered "reserved" from the previous section; I guess this comes back to my earlier question regarding what "reserved for future" means...

Reviewer: Right, same as L75. IVF is the vector transform for the VECTOR type. Both are reserved because neither is defined here yet, so they're consistent. The L75 fix now says clearly that "reserved" means the name is claimed but defined later.

> Index Instances may share the same index type while using different transform functions.

Reviewer 4: nit but I feel that this sentence goes beyond the spec for index itself, and reaches to the scope of what is considered allowed by catalog for index creation and management, which I think is another topic on its own (as a separate section or maybe in the irc spec?)

Reviewer: I think the original sentence wasn't quite clear, so I reworded it to: "An index type does not fix a single transform function; the same index type can be realized with different transform functions."

Each index snapshot references a complete set of index files and contains all data from the referenced table snapshot.

## Index Metadata

The index metadata file stores the index definition and snapshot history.

### Index Metadata File

| Requirement | Field               | Type                     | Description                                     |
|-------------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| required    | format-version      | int                      | Index specification version                     |
| required    | uuid                | string                   | Stable UUID assigned at creation                |
| required    | table-uuid          | string                   | UUID of the indexed table                       |
| required    | location            | string                   | Index root location                             |
| required    | type                | string                   | Logical index type                              |
| required    | transform-function  | string                   | Physical organization transform                 |

> | required    | key-column-ids      | list<int>                | Indexed columns                                 |

Reviewer 4: `id of the columns from the indexed table used for constructing index key` or something? I think this is probably another reason for us to define a "index key"/"transform value" early in the spec to differentiate this from the indexed table's source columns

Reviewer: updated the description to be clear.

| required    | snapshot-id              | long               | Index snapshot identifier                                           |
| required    | source-table-snapshot-id | long               | Source table snapshot                                               |
| required    | timestamp-ms             | long               | Snapshot creation timestamp                                         |
| required    | tracking-file            | string             | Tracking file location                                              |
| optional    | properties               | map<string,string> | Snapshot properties specific to this snapshot                       |
| optional    | key-metadata             | binary             | Implementation-specific key metadata, for tracking file encryption. |

## Tracking File

Each index snapshot references exactly one tracking file.

It contains summary metadata about all leaf files belonging to the index snapshot and enables efficient planning
without scanning every leaf file.

The tracking file may be stored using any supported metadata file format.

### Tracking File Entry

> Each tracking file contains a collection of tracking file entries. A tracking file entry describes a single leaf file

Reviewer 4: "tracking file entry" to describe "leaf file" feels a big awkward, could we just call it leaf file entry or data file entry? IMO "tracking file entry" feels like something describing a tracking file rather than something tracked by the tracking file (honestly I personally feel "metadata file" is clearer for conveying the intent, though I can see it may confuse people for the similar names in tables)

Reviewer: Renamed it to "leaf file entry"

Reviewer: When re-reading the spec, I feel that "Leaf File Entry" is confusing here, since it lives under the Tracking File section. I'd like to keep this as Tracking File Entry to match Iceberg's manifest entry convention — it lives in the tracking file and describes a leaf file, just as a manifest entry lives in the manifest and describes a data file. I've kept the body text explicit ("describes a single leaf file") to avoid the ambiguity you noted.

tracked by an index snapshot. The fields are the subset of the V4 manifest entry fields that are relevant to planning
queries against the index.
Entries contain aggregated statistics for all referenced leaf files, enabling engines to perform pruning and planning
without opening every leaf file.

| Field ID | Name               | Type    | Requirement  | Description                                                                                                  |
|----------|--------------------|---------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 100      | location           | string  | required     | Location of the referenced file.                                                                             |

> | 101      | file_format        | string  | required     | File format name, such as parquet, avro, or orc.                                                             |

Reviewer 4: I'm still debating if we want to define file format on snapshot level or file level; I think leaving it on file level may require the reader to check for each leaf file's format to use the right reader, which feels unnecessary given index writers likely will use the same file format for writes most of the time (cross-engine incremental index writes might be an outlier but I wonder how common that use case could be...)

Reviewer: snapshot-level makes sense: readers check format once per version instead of per leaf, and all leaves in a snapshot share a format anyway. Since this moves the field out of the leaf entry (which @pvary added), I'll defer the actual change to him.

Author: I'm also undecided on this.
My slight preference is to keep the file format specified on a per-file basis, as that keeps us aligned with the existing table read path and avoids introducing a special case unless there is a strong reason to do so. Keeping the behaviour consistent with table files would make the implementation and maintenance simpler.

Author: The more I think about this, I more prefer to keep the layout consistent with the manifest entries. If we don't find a compelling reason to handle it differently, then stick to the tried solutions.

So we should keep it in the `Tracking File Entry`

| 103      | record_count       | long    | required     | Number of records contained in the referenced leaf file.                                                     |
| 104      | file_size_in_bytes | long    | required     | Total file size in bytes.                                                                                    |
| 146      | content_stats      | struct  | optional     | Statistics used for planning and pruning, including transform-key statistics and optional column statistics. |
| 131      | key_metadata       | binary  | optional     | Implementation-specific key metadata, used for leaf file encryption.                                         |

### Content Statistics

> The content statistics structure contains transform-key statistics and optional column statistics for the referenced

Reviewer 4: this feels like we need another `transform_key_stats` / `index_key_stats` in the table above?

Reviewer: I think this matches what I flagged on the same field: the transform bounds (transform_min/max) are required for routing but currently live inside the optional content_stats, so they could be missing. I think we can split it into a required transform_key_stats (the transform-value bounds) and an optional column_stats. Since it's a schema change to @pvary's field, I'll let him confirm.

Author: I think, my first answer would be the same as here: https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/16961#discussion_r3486534980

>We could make `content_stats` mandatory and require `transform_min` and `transform_max` as well. That would simplify reuse of the existing table code, since the underlying schema would remain identical and only the required/optional constraints would differ. This approach avoids introducing structural differences while still allowing indexes to enforce the fields they need.

file. The transform-key statistics are always present, while column statistics are optional and may be omitted for
performance reasons.

## Leaf Files

Leaf files contain the actual index entries and represent the lowest level of the index hierarchy.

Leaf files must be standard Iceberg data files and may be stored using any Iceberg-supported file format:
- Parquet
- Avro
- ORC - May be removed if ORC support is deprecated in Iceberg.

The schema of a leaf file is determined by the index definition and contains:
- All key columns defined by the index
- All included columns defined by the index
- The transform value produced by the transform function
- The source file path
- The source row position

> ### Transform functions

Reviewer 4: Not sure what's the best way but I wonder if we should let this section to point to above `Index Transform Function` section or the other way around, to avoid two sections explaining pretty much the same thing in different paragraphs twice

Reviewer: deduped. The transform list now lives once in the Index Transform Function section (with the Bound Interpretation column folded in), and this section is now "Transform value ranges", just the range/pruning mechanics with a pointer up to the definition.

The transform function produces a transform value for each indexed row. To enable efficient planning, the transform
value space is divided into non-overlapping ranges. Each leaf file contains entries for a single range, while the
tracking file stores the corresponding bounds for every leaf file. If, and only if, a single transform value produces
more rows than fit in one leaf file, multiple leaf files may be created for that value, and engines must read all of
them.

When a query predicate can be mapped to transform value ranges, engines can use these bounds to prune leaf files that
cannot contain matching entries, avoiding unnecessary reads.

> A well-designed transform function also preserves locality between the source columns and the resulting transform value,

Reviewer 4: Nit: this paragraph feels more like optimization guidance than a spec requirement, as I think whether a transform is/can be “well-designed” depends on the exact use case and query pattern. Might worth considering rephrasing this as a note about pruning effectiveness depending on the transform/query pattern and combined to the previous paragraph?

Reviewer: Reworded it as guidance rather than a requirement

allowing additional pruning using column statistics stored in the tracking file. For example, a Hilbert transform can
cluster similar multi-column keys together, reducing the number of leaf files that must be read for range scans and
partial-key lookups.

The following transform functions are currently supported:

| Transform | Bound Interpretation |
|-----------|----------------------|
| IDENTITY  | Original value range |
| HASH      | Hash bucket range    |
| HILBERT   | Hilbert key range    |

The following transform type is reserved for future specifications:

| Transform | Bound Interpretation       |
|-----------|----------------------------|
| IVF       | Centroid identifier range  |

> ### Leaf Schema

Reviewer 4: do we want to store this schema in one of the tables above? It looks like it's not referred anywhere or did I miss it?

Reviewer: The leaf schema isn't stored as its own object, but everything it's derived from is already in the Index Metadata File — key-column-ids, included-column-ids, and transform-function (which determines the transform_value column's type), plus the fixed file_path/position columns. A reader reconstructs the leaf schema from those rather than reading a stored schema.

Reviewer 4: The thing that feels a bit awkward with me is that now we have to look up different places for piecing up the schema of the index, e.g. we have firstly `key-column-ids` which only tells id (though it's fine given we most likely have loaded the base table to look up name/type), and then the `transform_value`/`file_path`/`position` below, meanwhile `transform_value` feels like an optional column as well so we probably don't know if it exists unless we look at data/catalog response. I wonder to what level do we want the metadata file to be self contained. Or is `transform_value` required/will we include column id of all three in a separate field similar to `key-column-ids`?

Author: This is an interesting question. We could duplicate data here, but I feel that not storing the schema in the index metadata would make it even more clear that it is generated.

I'm open to suggestions, this is just my "not-that-strong" opinion 😄 

BTW: Removed the transform_value, as we decided that we don't want to restrict transform functions to return only long values

consistent between the table and the index.

The index-specific columns are:

| Field Id  | Column          | Type   | Description                                                            |
|-----------|-----------------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TBD       | transform_value | long   | The result of applying the index transform function to the key columns |
| TBD       | file_path       | string | The path of the source data file the entry references                  |
| TBD       | position        | long   | The row position of the entry within the source data file              |

## Example: Key Lookup Index

Index Type:

```text
SCALAR
```

Transform Function:

```text
HASH(primary_key)
```

Leaf Schema:

| Column           |
|------------------|
| primary_key      |
| transform_value  |
| file_path        |
| position         |

The leaf files are organized by hash key, while the tracking file stores summary information and pruning statistics.

## Snapshot Evolution

Index snapshots are immutable.

Updating an index creates:

> 1. New leaf files

Reviewer 4: This and the below `Maintenance` section feel like explaining the general usage of index and how index got updated, I wonder if putting these as separate sections might make them feel more fragmented, and if it would be a easier to follow flow if we add them to the beginning sections when we explain what the index is, how it is created and what benefit does it bring. Since if we put such as a separate section, I guess we might need to be more explicit in terms of the operations that could happen, e.g. updating an index not necessarily requires creating new leaf files (could be no change or removal), or even "clear"/"rebuild" the entire index instance from scratch? :)

Author: Do we need this in the spec? The spec is only for describing the data stored for the index, or we need to describe how to use it effectively?

Author: Maybe something like https://iceberg.apache.org/view-spec/#appendix-a-an-example would be good. So it is not part of the specification, but describes how the index will be used

## Goals

- Define a portable metadata format for indexes
- Provide a common storage architecture for index data
- Allow indexes to evolve independently from table metadata as catalog-managed objects
- Enable index sharing across engines
- Provide a framework for defining new index types and transform functions

## Overview

Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files.) Leaf files store an ordered set of rows containing at least a key and the path of a Iceberg Table data file and the position within that file where the row where that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Indexing Transform which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.

Like Iceberg tables, views, and functions:

> - Metadata and data files are immutable

Reviewer 6: Maybe we should say Tracking Files and Leaf Files, or Metadata (Index Metadata.json and Tracking Files) and Data (Leaf files) are immutable

Reviewer: Sounds good.

- Updates create new metadata files
- Catalogs perform atomic metadata swaps

> Index data is stored separately from metadata.

Reviewer 6: Not sure what we mean by this line

Reviewer: Agree. I removed  this.

### Index Metadata File

| Requirement | Field               | Type                     | Description                                     |
|-------------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| required    | format-version      | int                      | Index specification version                     |
| required    | uuid                | string                   | Stable UUID assigned at creation                |
| required    | table-uuid          | string                   | UUID of the indexed table                       |
| required    | location            | string                   | Index root location                             |
| required    | type                | string                   | Logical index type                              |
| required    | transform-function  | string                   | Physical organization transform                 |
| required    | key-column-ids      | list<int>                | Indexed columns                                 |
| optional    | included-column-ids | list<int>                | Included columns                                |

> | optional    | properties          | map<string,string>       | Index properties applicable for every snapshot  |

Reviewer 6: Should we have a pointer to the current snapshot?

Reviewer: Added a `current-snapshot-id` field to the index metadata. One open question: required vs optional? I made it optional since a newly created index may not have a snapshot yet.

Author: I would prefer not have `current-snapshot-id`. Let's talk about this

Author: While maintaining a history of metadata changes is important for tables, I don't see the same requirement for indexes. The user-defined portion of index metadata is typically established at creation time and remains unchanged throughout the index lifecycle. When changes are needed, most systems handle them through a drop-and-recreate workflow rather than by modifying the existing index definition.

If we follow that model, there is little value in maintaining metadata history for indexes. Eliminating it would also simplify the metadata model by removing the need for concepts such as metadata-log and current-snapshot-id.

The main requirement we do have is ensuring a strictly linear evolution of index metadata. That can be achieved by relying on the metadata file sequence itself. We can validate metadata JSON filenames, similarly how view metadata evolution is handled today.

Reviewer: Thanks @pvary, this makes sense. Agree that index metadata is essentially static: the definition is set at creation, and changes go through drop-and-recreate, so we don't need table-style metadata history (metadata-log) for indexes, and linear evolution can be enforced via the metadata file sequence, like the view spec does.

For "current": as you noted in the other thread, the right index snapshot can be derived by matching source-table-snapshot-id to the table snapshot being queried, so we don't need a stored current-snapshot-id either.

I have already added the `current-snapshot-id`. Let's drop it.

Author: removed `current-snapshot-id`

Reviewer 2: I agree with the resolution of the thread, but one thing that isn't clear to me is what triggered @RussellSpitzer to proposed such an index wide, global current snapshot id. The value can be inferred from the index snapshots if needed, isn't it right?

Author: Tables have the current-snapshot-id, views have current-version-id, udf definitions have current-version-id. Here the user interactions create historical versions of the objects. We needed to examine the same things for indexes as well. If we want versions generated by user interaction we might want to go back to versions for indexes as well

| required    | snapshots           | list<index-snapshot>     | Index snapshots                                 |

## Index Snapshot

Each index snapshot corresponds to one version of the index data.

> | Requirement | Field                    | Type               | Description                                                         |

Reviewer 6: In the Iceberg metadata we track parents, but i'm not sure it makes sense here but I think we should probably think through that. Ie right now there isn't really a history of index snapshots, just a list of them, do we want that to exist?

Reviewer: I guess the parent-chain part doesn't really fit an index, because each index snapshot is rebuilt independently from a table snapshot (via source-table-snapshot-id), not stacked on the previous index snapshot. But the history-log part (which snapshot was current over time) does make sense. Maybe add a history-log?

Author: I don't see much value in storing index history.

In most cases, a query engine is trying to find the appropriate index snapshot for a particular table snapshot. If no index snapshot exists for that table snapshot, the engine already needs to understand the table's snapshot lineage and can combine the table history with the index metadata to determine whether a given index can be used.

Since that information is already available at the table level, duplicating it in the index metadata feels unnecessary.

The main use case for maintaining explicit index history would be snapshot expiration. However, snapshot expiration is an index maintenance operation rather than a query-time operation, so an additional lookup into the table metadata seems like an acceptable cost. Given that, I would prefer to avoid storing a separate index history and instead rely on the existing table history when needed.

Reviewer: Makes sense, agree we don't need a separate index history.

 - See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
 - limitations under the License.
 -->

# Iceberg Index Specification

## Background and Motivation

Indexes enable query engines to locate relevant rows without scanning entire datasets.
They can accelerate point lookups, range predicates, and other retrieval patterns
while preserving Iceberg's table format, snapshot isolation, and interoperability.

This specification defines:

- A portable metadata format for indexes
- A catalog-managed index object independent from table metadata
- A common storage architecture for index data
- A framework for defining new index types and transform functions

Indexes are optional. Engines may choose to create, maintain, consume, or ignore them.

## Goals

- Define a common metadata format for indexes
- Allow indexes to evolve independently from table metadata
- Enable index sharing across engines
- Provide a foundation for future index types

## Definitions

### Index Type

The index type defines the logical category of an index and the class of queries it is designed to accelerate.

The following index type is defined in this specification:

| Type   |
|--------|

> | SCALAR |

Reviewer: `SCALAR` is listed but never defined.  I suggest adding a description column.

Reviewer 5: +1

Reviewer 5: In fact, I'm hesitating to add this. The index type is part of transform function.

Author: In many cases, the query engine only cares about the index type, and multiple transform functions may satisfy the same requirement. However, there are scenarios where the specific transform function becomes important.

Examples:
- Flink job recovery requires a SCALAR index with a HASH transform function. A hash-based distribution allows the index to be restored directly into job state without an additional shuffle phase.
- Spark range deletes on a primary key require a SCALAR index with an IDENTITY or HILBERT transform function. A HASH transform destroys key ordering and would effectively require a full index scan.
- Spark point lookups on a primary key generally do not need to understand the transform function. They can rely on the index contract that a given key maps to a single leaf file, regardless of how that mapping is implemented.

The following index types are reserved for future specifications:

| Type   |
|--------|
| VECTOR |
| TERM   |

The index type communicates the capabilities of an index to query engines and helps determine whether an index is
applicable to a particular query.

> ### Index Transform Function

Reviewer 6: I think these sections (Transform, Instance, Snapshot) should follow the overview. Currently they have a lot of undefined terms in them

Reviewer: Agree to move these definitions to after the `Overview` section.

The index transform function defines how the index organization key is derived from source table columns when rows are
stored in the index.

The transform function determines the physical organization of the indexed data and therefore influences which query
patterns can efficiently leverage the index.

> The following index types are reserved for future specifications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following transform functions are defined in this specification::
```

> | Transform |

Reviewer: The Leaf Files Transform functions section also has this table and the reserved table below it. Should we remove the tables here, or remove them from the Leaf Files section, so the list lives in only one place?

|-----------|
| IDENTITY  |
| HASH      |

> | HILBERT   |

Reviewer: I think we agreed the organization transform is an Iceberg-style transform with a sort order, so I think we should use the Iceberg transform names: use `bucket` instead of `hash`.

I think for now the key-lookup index only needs `identity` and `bucket`, so we should move `hilbert` to the reserved table below.

Reviewer: Also add a sentence somewhere to say that tuple transforms like (bucket(key, 256), key) (bucket first, then sort) are also supported.

Author: I'm a bit reluctant to couple index transforms with partition transforms.

For one, some transform functions (like Hilbert transform) we definitely want for indexes, but don't have a meaningful partition transform equivalent today, and it's not obvious that they should. Their purpose and requirements are fundamentally different.

Looking ahead, this separation becomes even more important for more advanced index types such as IVF. An IVF index needs to assign vectors to centroids, but those centroids are derived from the table data itself and cannot be defined upfront at table creation time. Modeling this as a partition transform would therefore be awkward and unintuitive, as it introduces data-dependent behavior that is very different from the role of existing partition transforms.

Overall, index transforms seem to serve a distinct purpose and have different requirements than partition transforms, so I'd prefer to keep the two concepts separate.

Reviewer: Thanks @pvary, makes sense.  I agree index transforms are their own thing, separate from partition transforms. Hilbert and IVF are good examples that don't fit the partition model.

My point was only about naming: where an index transform is the same as an existing Iceberg transform, reuse the same name (e.g. bucket instead of a new hash) so there aren't two names for the same thing. 

Two questions:

- Should this spec define its own list of index transforms explicitly? 
- Since you want Hilbert for indexes, should we keep it as a defined transform instead of moving it to reserved?

Author: The HASH transform allows the Index maintenance process to define the number of buckets, so it is slightly different than the BUCKET transform.

> Should this spec define its own list of index transforms explicitly?

We should define transform classes by defining characteristics and not exactly defining the algorithm themselves.

> Since you want Hilbert for indexes, should we keep it as a defined transform instead of moving it to reserved?

Makes sense.

The following transform functions are reserved for future specifications:

| Transform |
|-----------|
| IVF       |

Index Instances may share the same index type while using different transform functions.

### Index Instance

An index instance is a concrete realization of an index type and function applied to a specific table.

Users create index instances by specifying:

- The source table
- The index type
- The transform function
- The indexed columns
- The included columns

> - Index properties

Reviewer: Shall we mark `The included columns` and `Index properties` optional?

Reviewer 3: and what's the difference between included vs indexed columns? shall we add clear distinction?

Reviewer: - Key columns (renamed from "indexed columns"): the source-table columns the transform is applied to. They define the index key and how entries are organized.
- Included columns: optional covering columns copied into the leaf for read convenience. They don't affect organization or lookup — they just let a reader avoid going back to the base table for those values.

Author: > Shall we mark The included columns and Index properties optional?

Definitely. We should mark them as optional.

Multiple instances of the same index type may exist for a table.

### Index Snapshot

An index snapshot is an immutable version of the index data generated from a specific table snapshot.

Each index snapshot references a complete set of index files and contains all data from the referenced table snapshot.

## Overview

> Indexes are stored as independent catalog objects.

Reviewer 6: Suggestion that we just have a short description of the whole thing write here

```suggestion
Indexes are stored as a collection of files with some Iceberg table like semantics. At a high level they consist of a tracking file (similar to a root manifest file) which contains listings for a defined set of leaf files (similar to data files.) Leaf files store an ordered set of rows containing at least a key and the path of a Iceberg Table data file and the position within that file where the row where that key is stored. The organization of leaf files is defined by an Indexing Transform which varies based on the type of index. This structure is recorded in an Index metadata.json file which contains a set of snapshots, each of which points to a single tracking file mapping to the complete state of an Iceberg table at a given Iceberg table snapshot.
```

Reviewer: Agree this is cleaner.

Like Iceberg tables, views, and functions:

- Metadata and data files are immutable
- Updates create new metadata files
- Catalogs perform atomic metadata swaps

Index data is stored separately from metadata.

Each index snapshot references a tracking file which describes the leaf files belonging to the snapshot.

```text
Index Metadata
    |

>     +-- Index Snapshot

Reviewer: +-- Index Snapshot (one or more)?

Author: updated to `Index Snapshot(s)`

the leaf files.
- The transform value space is divided into non-overlapping ranges.
- Each leaf file stores entries for a single range.
- The tracking file stores range bounds for each leaf file.

This structure enables efficient planning while keeping the data layout flexible for different index implementations.

## Index Metadata

The index metadata file stores the index definition and snapshot history.

### Index Metadata File

| Requirement | Field               | Type                     | Description                                     |
|-------------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| required    | format-version      | int                      | Index specification version                     |
| required    | uuid                | string                   | Stable UUID assigned at creation                |
| required    | table-uuid          | string                   | UUID of the indexed table                       |
| required    | location            | string                   | Index root location                             |

> | required    | type                | string                   | Logical index type                              |

Reviewer 6: Are we going to have this only be chosen from a set of index types we define? Feels like we should if these are going to be interoperable. This also makes me think a bit about the "reserved" terms above. I think basically everything should be reserved unless we define it here imho.

Reviewer: Agree it should be a closed set for interoperability. One step back though: I think we only scoped the key-lookup index, we didn't actually agree on a `SCALAR`/`VECTOR`/`TERM` type yet.

Reviewer 2: I asked a similar question in a separate thread and just realized the same question was asked here, apologies for the duplication.

 I'm not sure why it is needs to be a closed set. A custom, unrecognized index, can simply be ignored, there is no correctness issue to skip a secondary index. Having to update the spec for every new index type is unnecessarily making it hard on the ecosystem to extend it.

Reviewer: You're right, @fpj. An engine that encounters a type it doesn't recognize can just ignore that index and fall back to a normal scan, with no correctness risk. So a strictly closed set isn't required for correctness, and custom indexes should be allowed.

I think the two goals reconcile: define a set of standard, well-known types in the spec so engines that recognize a type agree on its semantics (interoperability), while still allowing custom/experimental types that unrecognized readers safely ignore. We'd just want custom names namespaced so they don't collide with future standard names.

Reviewer 2: Sounds right to me.

> | required    | transform-function  | string                   | Physical organization transform                 |

Reviewer 6: This probably needs to be well defined? An expression or something we explicitly make here?

Author: Similar to the question of which values should be supported for index types, although I consider this less critical. In many cases, an index can still be used effectively based on its column statistics, even when the reader does not recognize or understand the specific transform function.

| required    | key-column-ids      | list<int>                | Indexed columns                                 |
| optional    | included-column-ids | list<int>                | Included columns                                |

> | required    | file-format         | string                   | Leaf file format                                |

Reviewer 6: Why do we need to define the leaf file format? Shouldn't this be done per row in the tracking file?

Reviewer: Agree this should be defined in the tracking file.

| optional    | properties          | map<string,string>       | Index properties applicable for every snapshot  |

> | required    | snapshots           | list<index-snapshot>     | Known index snapshots                           |

Reviewer 6: Why "known" ?

Reviewer: Agree `known` should be removed.

> | required    | snapshots           | list<index-snapshot>     | Known index snapshots                           |

Reviewer: The metadata has a `snapshots` list but nothing says which one is current. Should we add a `current-snapshot-id`, or define current as the snapshot whose `source-table-snapshot-id` matches the table's current snapshot?

Author: I'm not convinced that we need to store a current pointer.

In most cases, the "current" index version can be derived from the table state, and I suspect users are not actually interested in the latest index snapshot in isolation. What they really care about is the index snapshot associated with the table snapshot they have chosen to query.

For that reason, I would avoid introducing a separate current concept for indexes.

One scenario where something like it may be useful is when multiple index snapshots exist for the same table snapshot. For example, a lightweight maintenance job might initially produce an index snapshot for a given table snapshot, and later determine that a full rewrite or reorganization is required, producing a newer index snapshot for that same table snapshot.
In that case, the original index snapshot may still need to be retained so that any queries already using it can continue to run. However, new queries against the same table snapshot should automatically pick up the newer index snapshot. Supporting this behavior may require some notion of a preferred or active index snapshot but for a given table snapshot, but that is different from maintaining a global current index version.

Reviewer: Agree deriving the current index snapshot from `source-table-snapshot-id` works, so we don't need a stored pointer. Continuing the `current-snapshot-id discussion` in @RussellSpitzer's thread to keep it in one place.

| required    | snapshot-id              | long               | Index snapshot identifier                                           |
| required    | source-table-snapshot-id | long               | Source table snapshot                                               |
| required    | timestamp-ms             | long               | Snapshot creation timestamp                                         |
| required    | tracking-file            | string             | Tracking file location                                              |
| optional    | properties               | map<string,string> | Snapshot properties specific to this snapshot                       |
| optional    | key_metadata             | binary             | Implementation-specific key metadata, for tracking file encryption. |

## Tracking File

Each index snapshot references exactly one tracking file.

It contains summary metadata about all leaf files belonging to the index snapshot and enables efficient planning
without scanning every leaf file.

The tracking file may be stored using any supported metadata file format.

> ### Tracking File Entry

Reviewer: remove this

Each entry describes a single leaf file.

### Tracking File Entry

Each tracking file contains a collection of tracking file entries. A tracking file entry describes a single leaf file
tracked by an index snapshot. The fields are the subset of the V4 manifest entry fields that are relevant to planning
queries against the index.
Entries contain aggregated statistics for all referenced leaf files, enabling engines to perform pruning and planning
without opening every leaf file.

| Field ID | Name               | Type    | Requirement  | Description                                                                                                  |
|----------|--------------------|---------|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 100      | location           | string  | required     | Location of the referenced file.                                                                             |
| 101      | file_format        | string  | required     | File format name, such as parquet, avro, or orc.                                                             |

> | 103      | record_count       | long    | required     | Number of records contained in the referenced file or aggregated under the referenced tracking file.         |

Reviewer: remove `or aggregated under the referenced tracking file`?

| 104      | file_size_in_bytes | long    | required     | Total file size in bytes.                                                                                    |

> | 146      | content_stats      | struct  | optional     | Statistics used for planning and pruning, including transform-key statistics and optional column statistics. |

Reviewer: Does `content_stats` contain the transform bounds (`transform_min` / `transform_max`)? If so, I think we should make them explicit, required fields. They're needed for routing and non-overlapping ranges, but `content_stats` is marked optional here, so the bounds could be missing.

Author: We could make `content_stats` mandatory and require `transform_min` and `transform_max` as well. That would simplify reuse of the existing table code, since the underlying schema would remain identical and only the required/optional constraints would differ. This approach avoids introducing structural differences while still allowing indexes to enforce the fields they need.

Author: Given that we plan to store the `transform_value` in the leaf files, I think having the min-max stats there but making them required is a very natural extension of the current structure, and there is no need to change anything else.

```suggestion
| 146      | content_stats      | struct  | required     | Statistics used for planning and pruning, including transform_value min/max statistics and optional column statistics. |
```

Reviewer: Looks good to me

| 131      | key_metadata       | binary  | optional     | Implementation-specific key metadata, used for leaf file encryption.                                         |

### Content Statistics

The content statistics structure contains transform-key statistics and optional column statistics for the referenced
file. The transform-key statistics are always present, while column statistics are optional and may be omitted for
performance reasons.

## Leaf Files

Leaf files contain the actual index entries and represent the lowest level of the index hierarchy.

Leaf files must be standard Iceberg data files and may be stored using any Iceberg-supported file format:
- Parquet
- Avro
- ORC - May be removed if ORC support is deprecated in Iceberg.

The schema of a leaf file is determined by the index definition and contains:
- All key columns defined by the index

> - All included columns defined by the index

Reviewer: Since this is optional, maybe word it as "Any included columns defined by the index" to make clear it can be empty?

> - The transform value produced by the transform function

Reviewer: for an identity transform on the key, the transform value equals the key column, do we still want to save the transform value?

Author: Good question. It would introduce specific handling for the identity transform, but we could save storage.

Author: How frequent would be to have an identity transform?
I would hate to introduce extra layouts for a feature which is not used widely

Reviewer: Good question. For a key-lookup index, identity on the key is actually pretty common, it just sorts the leaves by key (bucket is the other common one). But I agree we shouldn't add a special layout just for it. For v1, let's always store `transform_value`, even for identity, so readers don't need special handling. The extra column only duplicates the key for identity, and the cost is small. We can optimize it away later if needed.

Author: Let's start with keeping, and we could revisit this later

cluster similar multi-column keys together, reducing the number of leaf files that must be read for range scans and
partial-key lookups.

The following transform functions are currently supported:

| Transform | Bound Interpretation |
|-----------|----------------------|
| IDENTITY  | Original value range |
| HASH      | Hash bucket range    |
| HILBERT   | Hilbert key range    |

The following transform type is reserved for future specifications:

| Transform | Bound Interpretation       |
|-----------|----------------------------|
| IVF       | Centroid identifier range  |

### Leaf Schema

Columns originating from the source table must preserve their original Iceberg field identifiers.
Reusing the original field IDs ensures that schema evolution, column renames, and type compatibility semantics remain
consistent between the table and the index.

The index-specific columns are:

| Field Id  | Column          | Type   | Description                                                            |
|-----------|-----------------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | TBD       | transform_value | long   | The result of applying the index transform function to the key columns |

Reviewer: the type is not always `long`, maybe change to `determined by the transform function`?

Author: Do we want to support transform functions that produce non-long values?
Doing so would certainly provide additional flexibility, but it would also increase the complexity for both readers and writers. If we have concrete use cases in mind that require non-long outputs, it would be worth exploring the trade-offs in more detail before committing to the added complexity.

Reviewer: A non-long transform_value would only be needed for range/ordered lookups via identity on a non-long key, and I'm not sure we need that in v1. Since the key-lookup index only does equality lookups , let's keep transform_value as long for now and revisit if range lookups come up.

Reviewer 5: Sorry, I'm not convinced. For range lookup cases, we may need to combine several columns as key columns and uses identity transform. Forcing it to be long will limit its usage.

| TBD       | file_path       | string | The path of the source data file the entry references                  |

> | TBD       | position        | long   | The row position of the entry within the source data file              |

Reviewer: `file_path` and `position` are basically Iceberg's reserved `_file` (2147483646) and `_pos` (2147483645). Should we reuse those reserved IDs and give `transform_value` another reserved ID?

Reviewer 5: +1

Author: I would reserve separate IDs for these pointer fields, as they represent different concepts.

In data files, `file_path` and `position` refer to the physical file containing the row and the row's position within that file. In the leaf files, however, these columns act as references, pointing to a target data file and a target row position.

Using distinct IDs would make this difference explicit and avoid overloading the meaning of the existing fields.
Additionally, if we want to read leaf files using the same readers as regular data files, reusing the same column IDs would require special-case handling. Keeping separate IDs would allow the semantics to remain unambiguous and avoid introducing reader logic that interprets the same column IDs differently depending on the file type.

Reviewer: Makes sense, agree we should use distinct reserved IDs

## Example: Key Lookup Index

Index Type:

```text
SCALAR
```

Transform Function:

```text

> HASH(primary_key)

Reviewer: change to `bucket(primary_key, N)`?

Author: See my comment above about merging partition transforms with index transforms.

Author: Also, I think the number of buckets (N) can be changed by the index maintenance process, while the index remain using a HASH transform function. So the HASH and the BUCKET are different

```

Leaf Schema:

| Column           |
|------------------|
| primary_key      |
| transform_value  |
| file_path        |
| position         |

> The leaf files are organized by hash key, while the tracking file stores summary information and pruning statistics.

Reviewer: `The leaf files are organized by hash key` -> `The leaf files are organized by transform value`?

Like Iceberg tables, views, and functions:

- Metadata files (index metadata and tracking files) and data files (leaf files) are immutable
- Updates create new metadata files
- Catalogs perform atomic metadata swaps

Each index snapshot references a tracking file which describes the leaf files belonging to the snapshot.

```text
Index Metadata
    |
    +-- Index Snapshot(s)
            |
            +-- Tracking File
                    |
                    +-- Leaf Data Files
```

Transform functions derive a transform value from the key columns and determine how index entries are organized within
the leaf files.

> - The transform value space is divided into non-overlapping ranges.

Reviewer 5: Should this a hard requirement? Let's say when we create an identity index for a column, and this column is highly skews on some values. With this restriction, we need to put rows with same values into same leaf data file, which may lead to skews data files. It may not be a problem for reading since we could further split it by row groups , but it may lead to pool write performance.

applicable to a particular query.

### Index Transform Function

The index transform function defines how the transform value is derived from the key columns when rows are stored in the
index. The following terms are used throughout this specification:

- **Key columns**: the source-table columns the transform function is applied to.
- **Transform value**: the value produced by applying the transform function to a row's key columns. Index entries are organized by transform value.
- **Included columns**: optional source-table columns copied into the index for read convenience. They do not affect how the index is organized.

The transform function determines the physical organization of the indexed data and therefore influences which query
patterns can efficiently leverage the index.

The following transform functions are defined in this specification. The bound interpretation describes what the
transform-value bounds stored in the tracking file represent for each transform:

| Transform | Bound Interpretation |
|-----------|----------------------|
| IDENTITY  | Original value range |

> | HASH      | Hash bucket range    |

Reviewer 5: Seem the exact definition of transform function  is missing? We should add sth similar to what we did for [partition transform](https://iceberg.apache.org/spec/#partition-transforms)?

| HILBERT   | Hilbert key range         |
| IVF       | Centroid identifier range |

An index type does not fix a single transform function; the same index type can be realized with different transform functions.

### Index Instance

An index instance is a concrete realization of an index type and function applied to a specific table.

Users create index instances by specifying:

- The source table
- The index type
- The transform function
- The key columns
- The included columns (optional)
- Index properties (optional)

Multiple instances of the same index type may exist for a table.

### Index Snapshot

An index snapshot is an immutable version of the index data generated from a specific table snapshot.

Each index snapshot references a complete set of index files and contains all data from the referenced table snapshot.

## Index Metadata

The index metadata file stores the index definition and snapshot history.

### Index Metadata File

| Requirement | Field               | Type                     | Description                                     |
|-------------|---------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|

> | required    | format-version      | int                      | Index specification version                     |

Reviewer 3: format-version is listed as required but not described anywhere in the spec. what does version 1 mean? and if a reader sees a version it doesn't recognize, what should it do — skip the index or fail? would be good to add a line or two about this, similar to how table format-version is handled in the main spec

Reusing the original field IDs ensures that schema evolution, column renames, and type compatibility semantics remain
consistent between the table and the index.

The index-specific columns are:

| Field Id  | Column          | Type   | Description                                                            |
|-----------|-----------------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| TBD       | transform_value | long   | The result of applying the index transform function to the key columns |
| TBD       | file_path       | string | The path of the source data file the entry references                  |
| TBD       | position        | long   | The row position of the entry within the source data file              |

## Commits and Concurrency

Index metadata is immutable. Every update, whether adding a new snapshot, dropping an old one, or changing index
properties, produces a new index metadata file rather than modifying the existing one. Each new metadata file is written
with a unique name.

A commit replaces the current index metadata file with the new one. This swap is atomic: it succeeds only if the current

> metadata file is still the one the writer started from. The check is based on the current metadata file name (the version

Reviewer 7: Could we clarify whether “current metadata file” here refers exclusively to the index metadata file, or whether the commit also compares against the Iceberg table metadata location/current snapshot?
I'm assuming in this case its the index metadata file specifically, but if index commits are invalidated by ordinary table metadata commits, this may lead to frequent conflicts or retry starvation on high-write-through tables.

Author: updated to clarify
